Title: Naming is power
Date: 2025-09-21
Category: Software
tags: religion
Slug: naming-power

Many cultural and religious traditions place a lot of importance in
names, and hold that names have power. There is something magical about
them.

In Classical Greek tradition, Hades was feared and his name was not
spoken. The Bible supposes that the name of God is to be used for
swearing oaths, which [should not be done
lightly](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Thou_shalt_not_take_the_name_of_the_Lord_thy_God_in_vain).
Islam recognises [99 names for
God](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Names_of_God_in_Islam), each
describing an aspect. Or in folklore, take the story of
[Rumplestiltskin](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Rumpelstiltskin), a
creature that is defeated only by discovering and speaking his name.
[Chinese culture places plenty of importance on
names](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Chinese_name), with various
traditions and taboos around them. Individuals often have several names
depending on the context and their relationships with the users of each
name. [Sun Yat-sen was a particularly notable
example.](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Names_of_Sun_Yat-sen)

I like naming things. Names make it possible to refer to something. Good
names make it possible to refer to something unambiguously. Even better
names allow you to not only refer to something, but also to place it
within a bigger context.

Naming things is a creative act, in both senses of the word *creative*
&mdash; both that it requires creativity, and that giving something a
name is a fundamental step in the process of bringing something into
being.  It is often the first thing that new parents do for their
children, perhaps even before they are born.

The Book of Genesis describes the power to name things as being
exclusively given to human beings:

> So out of the ground the Lord God formed every animal of the field and
> every bird of the air and brought them to the man to see what he would
> call them, and whatever the man called every living creature, that was
> its name. The man gave names to all cattle and to the birds of the air
> and to every animal of the field [...]

...alongside humanity's mastery over, and responsibility for, the world.

Anyway, I recently had the pleasure of commissioning a number of new
computers for a new lab network, and as part of that, was tasked with
coming up with names for these machines. I don't know where I'm going
with this anecdote, I just enjoyed the episode and it was a fun exercise
that felt good.

[RFC 1178](https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc1178.html) has some
specific guidelines about how to choose a name your computer. Choosing
the right level of abstraction when naming something is important.
