Title: Does vibecoding make coding more accessible?
Date: 2025-04-28
Category: Software
Tags: software-engineering, politics, teaching
Slug: vibecoding-accessible

I was a volunteer and organiser for [codebar](https://codebar.io/) for
several years and was heavily involved in outreach activities during my
time at Cambridge. In the face of cuts to DEI initiatives, I believe
that the lack of diversity at all levels of the tech sector seriously
harms the sector.

Besides the obvious lack of demographic diversity (I am the only woman
full-time employee software engineer in my department, out of 30 or so),
there is an over-valuation of people from computing and engineering
backgrounds, at the expense of people from other disciplines, especially
the social sciences and humanities, who have deep domain knowledge in
their own fields.  I am fortunate to work in a very interdisciplinary
team, where I've had the opportunity to learn about a variety of topics
in acoustics, audiology, music, image processing and data science;
besides topics in computing.

At the risk of overgeneralising, software engineers lack this domain
knowledge. Instead, we maintain our value by holding a monopoly over our
skills, acting as middlemen between innovators and implementations.
As with all middlemen, while this situation is very lucrative for us, it
slows down the development process and often introduces
misunderstandings along the way.

If "vibecoding" ([Wikipedia](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Vibe_coding))
can indeed reduce the barrier for people from other disciplines to start
coding, that is not necessarily a bad thing.  Of course, many people are
using these new abilities to create "innovations" that are either
useless or actively harmful to society or the environment. But that is a
wider problem with an economic system that rewards such creations. Maybe
more on that in a future post.

From an educational point of view, however, I don't think vibecoding can
be a substitute for a well-rounded engineer.

My experience using LLMs is that they are excellent for generating
prototypes and introducing one to a new technology or framework (or many
other topics); but they remain very poor at any higher-level tasks.
Vibecode does poorly with complex systems, and produces solutions that
do not scale well, do not handle edge cases, and have important flaws
such as security loopholes. And even code generation often produces
plenty of unnecessary code, or "cargo-cult programming".  When I point
out these flaws in their solutions, they are usually able to adapt the
solutions to address those issues but often create new problems.

So perhaps there is still a place for us software engineers. But we must
do better than being code monkeys: in particular, we must develop a
broader view of engineering that focuses on systems and business
requirements.
