Title: Music
Slug: music

I am an amateur musician. I sing (bass-baritone), and play orchestral percussion (mostly timpani), the alto recorder, and keyboard instruments.

I play with the [University of Cambridge Concert Band](https://uccb.soc.srcf.net/), and MagSoc Chorus and Orchestra.

I used to run the [Cambridge University Recorder Ensemble](https://cure.soc.srcf.net/).

I used to direct the [Queens’ Graduate
Choir](https://www.facebook.com/QueensGradChoir) in Cambridge, with
which I still sing; and also the now-defunct Queens’ Chamber Choir, a
small group dedicated to early music. With these two groups I directed a
number of major works, some of which have been recorded. You can watch
the performances below.


## Interests and research

A general early music enthusiast, I am particularly interested in
English music of the late Baroque and Regency eras. This period has
traditionally been overlooked as a lacuna in musical history,
overshadowed by Handel (1685–1759) who came before, the great Victorian
composers who came after, and the contemporaneous flourishing of music
on the Continent in the Classical and Romantic era.  Nonetheless,
composers like Thomas Arne (composer of _Rule, Britannia!_) and William
Hayes were instrumental in creating a national musical culture that
reached the common people, and it is during this period that many of the
hymns of the Anglican canon were written.

I produced the first edition of William Hayes’ *Orpheus and Euridice* in
modern notation, which saw the first modern live performance of the work
in Queens’ Chapel in 2022 (see below).

## Productions

<div id="productionsDiv" class="tabs-container"></div>

<script src="/static/videotabs.js">
</script>

<link href="/static/videotabs.css" rel="stylesheet">

[MagSoc: Mozart's *Requiem*](https://soundcloud.com/nomadicmathmo/magsoc-2025-mozart-requiem)

## Compositions and arrangements

Some of my compositions will eventually become available here.

* I am working on *England Embellished*, a collection of
  traditional English melodies arranged for various vocal or
  instrumental ensembles.
* During my time as director of Queens’ Graduate Choir I wrote a number
  of arrangements of sacred music, which will become a volume *Cantica
  Reginensis*.

### Vocal works

Because of a perennial lack of tenors, most of my compositions for QGC
have been for SAB.

_**Domine, quis habitabit?**_ An arrangement of Psalm 15 in the
Renaissance polyphonic style for SAB trio.
([MuseScore](https://musescore.com/user/26871315/scores/6559549))

**Drop, drop, slow tears** Arrangement of the Orlando Gibbons hymn for
SAB. ([pdf](/static/dropdrop.pdf))

### Instrumental works

**Variations on Saint Clement** Variations for piano quintet ([MuseScore](https://musescore.com/user/26871315/scores/5543990))
